Samuel, welcome back to Talk Python To Me. Great to have you here as always.
Thank you so much for having me back. Yeah, it's good to be here.
I saw your project and I immediately sent you a message. You need to come on the show and talk
about this. What is going on? What is Monty? Hat tip to the name. I want to hear the origin of the
name, but you might be able to guess it. I think I can guess it. I think I can guess it.
But yeah, it's awesome to be here talking about this.
You've been on a bunch of times, but there's a bunch of new listeners or they don't listen to every show.
Give us your background.
Yeah.
So I'm Samuel.
I'm probably best known as creating the Pydantic Validation Library way back in the annals of time in 2017.
That is kind of infrastructure, but Python today, we just crossed 10 billion downloads in total.
We're at like 580 million downloads a month.
So that gets a lot of usage.
Very lucky that Sequoia Capital came along and invested in Pydantic to start a company at the beginning of 2023.
So now we have a kind of stable of different things we do, what we call the Pydantic stack.
So there's Pydantic validation.
We talked about Pydantic AI, which is an agent framework where Monty kind of fits in best.
And then there's Pydantic Logfire, the observability platform for AI and general observability, which is the commercial bit of what we do.
So I suppose I'm supposed to be being CEOing most of the time.
I actually spend far too much of my time clauding.
I seem to be in good company.
I keep seeing people on Twitter, lots of CEOs of much bigger companies and writing lots of code.
So apparently I'm allowed to again.
It is an insanely exciting time with just the agentic AI in general.
And Claude, Claude Opus, Claude Sonnet in particular, they are so good.
I don't know about you.
I'm sure at least half the people, at least half of the people listening are like,
they've got a backlog of ideas they want to try,
things they've always wanted to build and not the time.
Or maybe it's a bit of a stretch.
Like, I don't really know mobile.
I can't really build a mobile app.
But if I could, I would build this.
And now you kind of can, right?
Yeah, I mean, I think it's got scary bits of it, too. I mean, maybe we're experiencing the bonfire of the thing we all, you know, I was speaking to Zach Hatfield-Dodds just before Christmas, and he was like, we have had this weird time period when the thing I love doing happens to be incredibly financially lucrative.
I mean, he's anthropic, so it's probably more financially. But hey, and maybe that that time is going to come to an end. But I still feel very privileged to have had that time. I don't know exactly what's going to go. I mean, and definitely the jobs of software developers are changing. And some of that is scary. But as you say, it's also super exciting projects from go build a mobile app, which you didn't know how to do. But there were others who did through to building Monty, which I think we were relatively well placed to do it as a team.
of people, but we would never have had the resources or the time to do it if it wasn't
for LLMs being especially good at tasks like that.
Interesting.
Okay.
I do want to dive into that later, but we haven't even introduced what Monty is yet.
So let's hold off on that deep dive.
But when I saw this, I'm like, I wonder what role that agentic coding sort of made this
possible for a small team.
That was certainly one of the thoughts I had.
- Yeah, I mean, I can dive into it, but yeah,
I mean, I've got a bit of help now from David Hewitt,
who is a great deal better Rust developer
and knows more of the Python internals than many people,
definitely more than me.
But for the most part, it was just me
in my spare time building it,
which I'll talk in a bit about like why I think
this is such an eligible project for LLM acceleration.
- Yeah, yeah.
So you're playing both sides of the fence here,
It sounds like both maybe using a little AI, but also building for AI, which I think is quite interesting.
Yeah, I think we're, I mean, yeah, we're doing, we're building Pydantic AI as a way for LLMs to power applications or be part of applications.
We're also using AI to build that.
More and more, I think of people's usage of Logfire is through their coding agent, as in, sure, people can log into Logfire.
We love our tracing view, et cetera.
But I acknowledge there's a lot of people
who are just gonna point and code code at it
and ask it to go and work out what's wrong
and fix their bug.
So yeah, we contact with what's going on in LLMs
all over the place.
- How did you facilitate that?
Like how can the AI get that information?
- We made this weird, esoteric, odd decision
back when we first started Logfire
not to allow users to write arbitrary SQL against their data.
We did that really because we thought it was too much hard work to build a query builder.
And SQL seemed like the thing we would want.
And it seemed like a pretty esoteric odd decision back when we started it in 2023.
Now it is the most powerful, most defensible thing we have.
Because we've spent two years learning how to build effectively an analytical database
that anyone can go and query and run any query against and dealing with all of the side effects of that.
But look, everyone has an MCP server, fine.
but what's powerful about log fires is LLMs are very, very, very good at writing SQL when they have a schema.
And so you ask it something that no one's ever asked it before, say, find me the five slowest endpoints by P95.
Now, that's a reasonable one, but you can imagine some incredibly complex question that no one's ever answered before
that no other kind of query builder dialect could do.
But because you have full SQL, you can go and write this.
LLM will write the SQL to give you back the answer.
I want the P95 worst top five there.
for this app at this endpoint for the people
in Southeast Asia on Tuesday, right?
Something like, like you're like, okay,
we've run out of filters, but like SQL just keeps going.
And yeah, by the way, group that by hour
or group that by every 15 minutes.
And like, you know, it gets arbitrarily more complex.
That just, just works.
- Yeah, how very interesting.
I just wrote an article about how I think working
in the native query language if you're using agentic programming.
I saw you write it.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And I mean, Pydantic's a perfect fit for that style.
It's like if you could write your actual queries
in native syntax and then transform it to a rich class,
like a Pydantic or a Data class or something like that,
these AIs, they are so trained on SQL or MongoDB native query
syntax or whatever vanilla lowest level thing.
They see more of that than anything because it's across all the technologies.
I think that's going to be a thing.
And it's interesting how you sort of set the stage so that was already present for you and your product, right?
Yeah.
But even when we started building the Logfire platform, I remember saying, everyone was like, which ORM are we going to use?
We're building a FastAPI, so there was some debate about how we do it.
And I was like, let's just write SQL.
And everyone, you know, it seemed like an odd thing to do because, sure, it's like six lines of SQL to do a simple, like, what would be a, like, get in Django.
ORM. But I mean, I think even before LLMs, people were compelled enough because they were like,
yeah, the autocomplete kind of LLM will do a lot of the work for me. And now I have complete
control. Now I think where the majority of code is being written by AIs, having full control,
full SQL is incredibly useful. And you can optimize it, right? You can only get the particular column
that you want. You can be very careful about which indexes are being used. You can copy paste the
SQL into whatever and work out the plan,
that's much harder when you're using an ORM.
So, yeah.
Yeah.
And you could just star star the dictionary
that comes back right into a pedantic class
and then you put that behind a function.
You don't mess with it.
It's safe.
Exactly.
Yeah.
You kind of get the programmer benefits
of programming against typed classes
and the AI benefits of it can just talk like vanilla
and the performance as well.
All right.
don't necessarily want to go too far down that rat hole we got a different one to go down
let's talk about python interpreters so you built monty a specialized python interpreter written in
rust and i i just want to just do a little historical journey to show like for people
who don't know like this is not the first one of these i actually i'm happy to riff on this but i'll
you take the lead i heard a conversation about two from two programmers an interchange exchange
between those two talking about c python they're like what is c python is it like python that
compiles to c or like you know so maybe just a little bit of a chat about what the heck is an
interpreter yeah go ahead i remember being confused about that too and and you know siphon which i
don't think we hear about so much anymore but that confused me as well i remember yeah so it's
interesting that even from as you know far back as cpython's uh origination there was a acknowledgement
that there might be other pythons and the python is a is a language not an implementation but yeah
go ahead yeah so well we've got the python interpreter and we got python code we write
often we write well python the language but when it executes it doesn't actually execute in python
it might execute because C understands it and a C compiled thing runs or in your case rust
understands the bytecode right so the interpreter parses our python into python bytecodes
which you can get through to with the disk module you can disassemble it and look at the actual
bytecodes you got back and then those are sent off to like a giant loop that interprets them
hence the term interpreter so we've got c python we have the defunct iron python for dot net which
which made it all the way to 3.4.
We've got the defunct Jython,
which made it all the way to 2.7.
And we've got the much more exciting and modern Pyodide,
which- - Pyodide is still CPython, so-
- Yes, but compiled for WebAssembly,
which I feel, I don't know,
I feel like Rust and WebAssembly have this kinship.
So it's like, I don't know,
it feels closer to Rust than the others.
- I agree, there's also Rust Python,
which is in active development.
I don't know what that's currently pointing at.
There's also Grail, which is another Python interpreter.
And the second biggest really is PyPy,
probably the most best known one of all.
So there's, I mean, there's a,
without meaning to cause offense to those that are still active,
there's also Unladen Swallow was another attempt.
There's a whole, but look,
without meaning to cause offense to any of those that are still alive,
there was a kind of graveyard of other Python implementations.
And so I went into this knowing that it's a space where lots of people have tried to build things, put in, bluntly, a great deal more effort than we have.
And for the most part, I wouldn't say they failed, but they haven't got the same kind of adoption that CPython has.
I mean, I think CPython is 99.9 of usage of Python.
And my take is that the reason for that is you need almost complete, perfect consistency with CPython to use something else.
Again, you need 99.59s of perfection, of identical behavior before you would go and switch in any real application.
I remember trying to use PyPy.
And even if I could get it to run,
well, it turns out it's foreign function interfaces
and not with like asyncpg was slower than CPython's.
And so actually it didn't perform as well.
And so the threshold to switch from CPython to something else
or to choose something else was incredibly high.
And so we are not trying to build another Python interpreter
that you might credibly move your application across.
We're using Python as a syntax for a very specific thing where LLMs write code.
And the fact that we have a different goal is one of the reasons that we thought this was a credible project to take on.
You know, the real challenge, I think, that I saw with all of those is there are so many different use cases.
And it's both a big benefit of all the Python packages and stuff.
But this package pulls in this compiled thing,
and this other one pulls in another compiled thing,
and it assumes that the gil works exactly in this way.
And so there's all these implied behaviors
that have to be carried across.
And a lot of these, I think we're trying to say,
let's put those to the side and see
if we could build something neater that's more native to Java
or.NET or whatever people were after with those different ones.
But then the compatibility just hit him in the face, right?
I haven't actually counted PyPI lately,
but how many, we're almost just short of three-quarter million,
two packages short of three-quarters of a million packages.
I'm just going to say, yes, we're going to leave it open.
We're absolutely leaving that open.
But trying to be compatible with that many projects?
We're actually 5,002 short of.
oh yeah yeah okay sorry i just sorry to be a pedant but it comes with the oh yeah yeah you
know you're right right seven four four not seven yeah well we're we're gonna there's gonna be some
kind of milestone reach but it's not the one i was hoping for anyway the point is there's this there's
so many edge cases and so many specializations yeah i think that's really where it hit them and
you know maybe this is a good good segue to just you know what if not that then what are
you actually building what is this monty so monty tries to solve uh this problem where we want to
allow llm's are very very good at writing code we're talking about them writing sequel earlier
they're very good at writing um python and and javascript i think honestly it wouldn't really
matter to the implementation whether we were whether we were implementing python or java whether
whether we, or JavaScript, it just turns out for a bunch of reasons.
Python is easier and it's also like where we come from.
The simplest use case of Monty is what people call programmatic tool calling or code mode,
where instead of my LLM calling tools in a loop,
sometimes using the return value from one tool straight into the next tool,
the LLM can just go and write code and thereby be more reliable and much more performant and much
lower cost. So we've seen examples of like, if you, for example, connect Pydantic AI with code
mode enabled to GitHub's MCP and you say, go and find the five latest pull requests. And I forget
what the question was, right? But the point was, we have to go jump through their API via MCP.
and calculate some value,
we've seen tasks go from kind of $2 down to 4 cents
as a result of using code mode.
Because one of the big reasons for that
is that those MCP responses are vast.
And so the MMM has to put loads of tokens into context
to go and pull out, well, actually this is just like
the ID of the thing I need to make the next request.
- I just added an MPC server to talk Python
a few weeks ago, so people could ask questions
about it and stuff.
And what really surprised me is the actual return type that the MCP servers recommend is markdown, not structured data.
So you basically send a giant blob of markdown back as the response.
And then, like you're saying, a bunch of tokens get consumed, just trying to understand the response rather than here's a JSON document.
I know it's called this. Boom. Answer.
So I think in the case of GitHub's one, they do return JSON, which is useful for us because we can then go parse that JSON.
But also, if you don't need the whole of that response,
you can search through it and extract a particular thing you need.
So the conservative threshold for what Monty can do
is allow us to implement this code mode use case.
And I think it works for that for the most part now.
We're working hard on some improvements.
The biggest difference of it versus all of the other Python implementations
is it is completely sandboxed.
It is isolated from your machine.
So you can't open a file
or read an environment variable
unless you very specifically say,
here are the environment variables
you're passing into this context.
Or here are the pseudo files
or indeed soon real files
that I specifically want to expose to this runtime.
That means that obviously reading a file
is going to be way less performant than in CPython
where we can go and make some sys call to read a file.
We're not doing that.
You're calling back from the Monty runtime
to the host runtime,
which might be Python or might be JavaScript or Rust,
to say, read me this particular file,
and then it can choose what to do.
But that is obviously what you want in this scenario
where the LLM is writing the code.
So that is the regard in which we are completely different
from all of the other Python implementations.
And there's a few other projects doing similar things,
but we're different in that regard
from all of the established programming languages,
which would all have ways to read files.
- Very interesting take.
You know, it might be worth just a quick mention to,
there's plenty of people out there listening
who have not done agentic tool using coding.
So I think understanding just that the flow of that
is kind of important to understanding the value of this, right?
And you did definitely touch on it.
But if you go and ask Claude Code to do something, or cursor,
or whatever, it's constantly like, let me run this git command.
Let me run this ls command.
Let me run this find.
And periodically, it'll just exec Python,
like little strings of Python and stuff.
So one of your core ideas is, what
if we could give it a better Python
that it's encouraged to use for this kind of behavior?
Let me describe it in a slightly different way.
Okay, so we have a continuum of how much control
and how much flexibility LLMs have.
At one end of the spectrum, we have pure tool calling,
where they can basically return JSON
with the name of a tool that you're going to call.
And there are agent frameworks like PyLands.AI
that allow you to hook that up to functions,
but ultimately, you're just getting JSON back
and you're deciding what to do with that,
and you may call the LLM again with some return value.
At the full other end of the spectrum,
we have complete computer use.
Some NLM has some vision model
and it's moving my cursor around on screen
to do everything I want.
Type onto our keyboard.
In the middle, we have a bunch of options.
We have Monty, which is kind of on the,
near the tool calling end of the spectrum.
Then we have sandboxes like Daytona and E2B and Modal.
And then we have the kind of Claude Code
or Codex style of like complete control of your terminal.
And along that spectrum,
you go more and more power
in terms of capacity of what the LLM might be able to do
and more and more security concerns.
And generally that comes with more and more of having an adult
watching what it's going to go and do and controlling it
and uncrashing it when it crashes, when it goes and does the wrong thing.
And so for the most part today, when we're using something in the cloud
that uses an LLM, it's doing the tool calling end of the spectrum.
That's what the kind of LangChain, Langgraph, Pydantic AI, Crew AI, all those guys are doing.
The NLM is doing very similar things when Claude Code basically decides to go and run LS or run RM-RF.
It's calling the tool like bash command, which the Claude application running on your machine chooses to go and execute.
The point is, for the most part, when we're building applications that are going to go and run in the cloud,
We don't have a software developer who understands what's going on, sitting, watching every command.
And so we need to be much more constrained in what we're going to allow the LLM to do.
But we want to have a little bit more expressiveness than we do with pure tool calling.
And at the moment, there is basically nothing in the spectrum between tool calling and go and run a sandboxing service and have access to a full sandbox.
And that's powerful. You can do a bunch of things with it.
but often we don't need that stuff and that's where monty's that's the kind of sweet spot
okay there's interesting
incentives or something that align with this undertaking as well right for example if you
don't give it a networking stack it can't do bad things on the network yeah because it just doesn't
exist right so it helps you it inspires to create like a more minimal version of the standard library
and so on. Yeah. And you can imagine like we, we will soon have a, some version of HTTP requests
that you can make, but you will be required to go and enable that explicitly. And even better
because you're calling through the host, you're going to have a perfect point where you can go and
read the URL and go, no, you can't make a request to local host and go and like start snooping on
what's going on here. You have to be making a request to an external URL or whatever else it
might be, or even I'm going to go and use some third party service to proxy all HTTP requests.
So it is never an untrusted HTTP request inside my network. But the point is, this is the single
biggest difference of Monty is every single place where you can, where the code can interact with
the real world, it must call an external function. So call back through the host. And then the other
regard in which it is, I think, somewhat innovative is we are not using traditional callbacks for
that. So we're not giving the runtime a list of pointers to functions it can call on the host.
Instead, the Monty runtime is effectively suspending and returning control to the host
whenever you're doing a tool call. So you're basically getting a response, which is like,
call the function read file with the arguments file name on whatever else it might be. And that
allows a few things, but in particular, it allows us if that tool we're going to go and run,
Well, that function we're going to go and run is going to take two days to run.
We can serialize the Monty runtime, go put that in a database and shut down that process
and wait for the tool to come back.
And that's something that CPython doesn't offer, understandably, but we are able to build
because we built Monty from scratch.
You can serialize the entire interpreter state, go put it into a database and retrieve it
later when you want to resume.
That's pretty wild.
So it's got this durability aspect, right?
Yeah.
Which I think is in these scenarios where often the code execution part of this is going to take milliseconds,
but our tools might take minutes or hours or whatever else, both for durability and to build an application that's both more durable and easier to maintain.
You don't have to have that interpreter state hanging around in memory as you would with CPython.
Yeah. And all the other things like timeout and just other weird oddities, right? Like I was working on something on my laptop just yesterday and my wife's like, you ready to go? I'm like, hold on. I got to wait. I got to wait for this chat to complete before it's been going for five minutes. It's almost done. Just hold on. Then I can close my laptop and roll, you know, because it would have, who knows what it would have done to it, right?
Yeah. Yeah. And talking of timeouts, the other thing that we're able to do in Monty is we're able to look.
It's not perfect yet because it's early, but we basically allow you to set resource limits.
So total execution time and memory limit in particular and recursion depth.
And therefore you can run this Monty thing in some small image in the cloud.
And you can say it's got 10 megabytes and it, you know, once it's hardened, you know, it's early.
We have that support now, but I'm not saying there are no ways around it.
It can't go and kill your machine out of memory.
It can't oom your container.
You're just going to get back a resources error saying too much memory consumed.
Yeah, very powerful.
So I see on the GitHub page here a couple of things.
First of all, it supports Python 3, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Presumably 15 will take the place of 10 in a year or something.
So that is the support for the...
So we have, so the Monty runtime is written entirely in Rust.
It has no dependency on CPython or Py03 or anything else.
It is a pure Rust library.
We're very lucky.
We have the AST parser from Ruff from the Astral team that allows us to go from Python code to some basically structured object.
So we don't have to go and do the parsing the Python code ourselves.
Right, because Ruff is already written in Rust.
I feel like the Astral team is kind of a peer of yours for sure.
You guys must look at each other, what you all are doing.
Yeah, yeah.
And we use that a lot.
And also we have ty built in.
So the ty type checker from Astral is again written in Rust.
And so it is compiled into Monty when you use it.
And so before you run your code, you can go and run type checking at the same time.
And again, that feedback is incredibly useful for LLMs to get them to write reasonably reliable workflows.
But to come back to your question, so we have Monty itself, which is just Rust, pure Rust, no other C dependencies, just in Rust.
And then we have, you can use that as a Rust library directly in your Rust application if you so wish, and there are people already doing that.
But we then have libraries for Python and for JavaScript, which use, in the case of Python, PyO3, which is amazing.
In the case of JavaScript, a thing called NAPI, or maybe you're supposed to pronounce it NAPI.
I don't know.
Which basically means we can then go and have JavaScript and Python packages where you can call Monty.
And so slightly confusingly, that Python 3.10 through 3.14 is referring to the Python package that you're installing.
the actual Monty is targeting Python 3.14 syntax only.
I see.
But those are the different language features
that you support basically for parsing, right?
Something like that.
Yes.
No, no, no.
So that's just like we only support.
So Monty itself will run as if it was 3.14
or some subset of it.
We don't support all the syntax yet,
but like 3.14 type stuff.
But yeah, when you're installing it,
when you're uv add Pynantic Monty,
you can do that in 3.10 through 3.14.
And obviously we maintain a bunch of Rust stuff.
We've worked hard to have binaries
for basically every environment,
Python, Linux, macOS, Windows,
a bunch of different architectures.
And we have PGO builds, which no one else has.
So that should improve performance again.
Yeah, yeah.
PGO?
PTO?
PGO is...
Yeah, tell people.
Yeah, so we did this first in Pydantic itself,
which obviously the core is written in Rust.
And it was, in fact, David Hewitt on our team,
who's the PyO3 maintainer,
who identified this great technique.
So basically, it's part of Rust.
You basically compile the library,
and then you run as many different bits of code against it as you can,
in our case, all of the unit tests.
And then you basically recompile it with pointers
as to which paths in the code, which branches are most common.
and you can get up to about 50% performance improvement.
The thing is, if you're building your own library,
that's a real pain.
If you're building your own application, that's a pain.
But if you just uv add Pydantic Monty,
you get that stuff for free.
Yeah, super cool.
Yeah, I'm reoriented in my acronyms now
for profiler-guided optimizations, right?
Yeah, so you basically,
compilers, as Python people,
we don't necessarily think about them a lot,
but compilers have all sorts of optimizations.
And I remember in the late 90s when I was working with things like GCC and stuff, you could actually break your program by asking for too many optimizations.
You know, you could, it had these levels.
And if you put it on the top level, there's a chance your program like literally might not run, which is a really bizarre thing for compilers to do.
But they can, they make like decisions, like maybe we should inline this so we can avoid a stack jump and setting up the stack and all that.
with the PGO, it actually looks at how the code runs and uses that as input for its optimization,
which is a super cool idea. So it's awesome you're doing that.
Yeah, and I honestly don't know what the difference is here. I think when I tried it,
it was relatively minor, but in Pydantic, it makes for a big improvement.
Yeah, going back a bit, I don't know if people remember, depending on where they were in their
journey but from pidantic one to two you all got like 50x performance increases and yeah the
pidantic of today is not the pidantic of 2017 right it sure is not it's sure it's not and that was
you know that was an enormous piece of work the rewrite because we didn't have nlms i think it
would have been a job that would have been a heck of a lot easier if we've been able to
point opus 4.6 at pidantic and be like do this but in rust but hey we got it done and i love
a lot along the way that's a challenge that we're gonna have to i don't know how you see it but i
think as an industry and individually each of us it's going to struggle with like how much rust
did you learn and how how much experience and ideas did you get spending that year evolving
pydantic versus if you just got it knocked out like where's the trade-off like i don't i know
there are those people who are like now it's impossible to enter as a software engineer i've
I've spoken to some people, some really amazing product people who are like, I'm writing code
suddenly because I have the right technical mindset. I just have never had the time to go
and learn all this stuff. And now the LLM can do the like rote for me and I can do the innovative
product stuff on top. So I get to build. So we have new people entering, but you're right. There
are going to be big challenges because just as I don't have a clue about assembly and I'm not good
at writing it, and that probably makes me a worse engineer than if I spent the first decade of my
career hand writing out assembly.
So as we add layers of abstraction,
the layer of abstraction beneath becomes kind of in the shade
to most of us.
And we never look at it.
Yeah, it's very interesting.
I sort of think of this whole agentic coding thing
as the change when design patterns became popular.
Instead of talking about, here's how we're
going to do the loop, or here's how we're
going to construct the class, you just think, singleton,
flyweight and like you're building with these bigger conceptual building blocks and now it's
kind of like make a login page okay we've got the law now what now what else am i building like you
can think almost in components rather than like very small pieces yeah kind of what pypi does but
like at the next level up yeah yeah kind of yeah i do think there's still room for people to come
into the industry i think it's super exciting you still just i think it's really going to come down
down to like problem solving and breaking down things into the way you want them to work and
that that's a programmer skill i also think what we haven't seen yet is the things that llms are bad
at because one if an if i tried to do something with an llm and it doesn't work that is not proof
that i cannot do it with another that's proof it didn't work that particular time whereas if i go
and try and do something with that lemon it does work well hey that's proof it can be done and two
no one wants to talk about this is the thing that failed right so anthropic announced we built a c
compiler in two weeks by giving opus loads of access what they didn't say is we tried to build
an ebay clone and it was a complete unmitigated failure cost us what would have been a hundred
thousand dollars of inference i'm not saying that's happened you know no criticism yeah we don't hear
about the failures both because they're less attractive to state and because they are not
clear identifiers as it were in the way that like successes are and i think one of the things we
will learn over the next few years is like here are the things lms are really really good at and
here are the things that no one succeeded with them yet and that's probably meaningful yeah i'm i don't
want to go too deep in this because i want to stay focused on money but i i'm also a believer of
jevon's paradox i think that this is going to create more demand for software now that people
see what is possible rather than just like, well, we're going to build exactly the same amount of
software with fewer people. So I think there's a lot there. So codspeed. So you have that. That's
this is a pretty interesting tool. I just recently learned about this. You have this as a badge on
your GitHub. Tell us a quick bit about this. I'm good friends with Arthur, who was the founder.
I'm a big fan of codspeed when you're building performance critical code. This is a nice view,
but the real powerful thing is if you go and basically on a on a pull request you can see
if you're getting performance regressions so okay um and even better so if you go to so these are
the particular benchmarks we have so if yeah maybe you go to branches it's a or if you go to a pull
request uh in in our github okay oh if i compare all these i've compared main against main that's
not super interesting if you go back to our if you go back to to the yeah go to go to a pr that you
guys have to PRs.
If you go, for example, to that
data class one, the third one down.
Gotcha. All right. Let's check that out.
You'll see we have
a comment from CodSpeed saying one benchmark
has got more performance.
More importantly, if I had
performance regression,
now CodSpeed would be failing
and I'd be like, I need to go fix that before
I merge it. So we can't, as long
as we have enough benchmarks, we can't have
silent regressions in performance.
And even more powerful, if I go
click on that particular one,
if you click on the pair tuples.
- Hold on.
Here perhaps, pair tuple, yeah got it.
- Yeah.
What you will see is we can now go and see
flame graph exactly what's taken what time
and where the performance changes have come from.
This change is very minor, so it's not very interesting,
but you can imagine if you accidentally do something slow
in your code, this is Rust, but it'll work on Python as well.
you would have this flame chart showing you
where the performance has changed.
- That's super neat.
Yeah, if people who are listening,
they just go to the Monty GitHub repo,
go to any pull requests, pull it down.
And there's just a comment from the cod speed bot.
And it says, the improvement changed
from 97.7 milliseconds to 88.1 milliseconds.
That's a 10.95% increase in performance.
So, hey, this thing doesn't hurt performance, right?
By adding it.
- Yeah, what's even cooler is under the hood they're using,
oh, I'm having a blank on the name,
but they're not even measuring time,
they're measuring like CPU instructions.
- CPU instructions, okay, yeah, yeah.
- So it can run in a noisy environment,
like you have actions and you can still get
pretty good accuracy on detecting performance changes.
- Yeah, okay.
- Valgrind, there we are.
Valgrind is the underlying tool that like
at the compiler level is looking at number
of CPU instructions.
Let's see what this pulls up.
Well, cool.
I don't know what that's about, but.
There's a polygonal, polygon.
What?
I don't know what this is, a cartoon,
but there's also the app.
The episode.
That's its logo. Okay, I got it.
At least it's like hero image or something.
Yeah.
Yeah, so maybe a good segue then into performance where the aim of Monty is not to build something faster than CPython.
The aim, I suppose, is to build something that is not heinously slower.
Performance seems to vary from about five times better to five times worse in most cases.
I'm sure that there are edge cases we need to go and improve where it's worse than that, but that's what I seem to see.
I mean, in my impression of the kind of LLM written code
that we're mostly talking about,
performance is not critical.
Execution is going to be in a matter of single digit milliseconds,
and that's not going to matter
when your LLM requests are taking seconds.
The thing where Monty really excels,
if you scroll down a bit,
and I can talk you through the table,
it's like near the bottom of the readme.
But yeah, there we are.
So like the startup time here measured for Monty to go from basically code to a result.
I think the code here is like one plus one is 0.06 milliseconds.
So six microseconds.
So and actually in the hot loop in benchmarks, we see one plus one going from code to result
in Monty taking about 900 nanoseconds.
So under a microsecond.
Again, that's microsecond, not millisecond or second.
When you compare that to like running something in Docker,
which is taking in my example here, 195 milliseconds,
Pyodide, Pyodide is an awesome project,
big fan of the team,
allowing you to run Python in the browser,
but wasn't designed for this use case.
Running, going from zero to like getting a result in Pyodide
is 2.8 seconds.
Starluck's a special case of another project, a bit like Monty, but a bit more limited.
But sandboxing, I was talking earlier about that being one of the main options,
like go run a basically spin up a new container somewhere.
There's a bunch of services that will do that.
They're very popular at the moment.
From scratch to creating a new container and getting a result, here it's taking over a second.
So where Monty really excels is where you have relatively small amount of Python code to call
and the overhead of running it is basically in the realistic term zero.
Yeah, so it's the cold start over and over and over again
because these are all one-shot commands,
like the LM asks for this thing and it shuts down when it gets the answer, right?
Yeah, and I'm sure that if you asked the sandbox providers,
they would be like, yeah, but it's not about cold start.
It's about reusing an existing container and that is way faster.
I agree that you know and then they're they're impressive pieces of technology
but there are also lots of cases where I do want do I do want cold start I've spoken to the big
LLM providers who are interested in Monty because if you go and ask uh ChatGPT uh like effectively
some some arithmetic or like how many days between these two dates in the background they're running
python code um do that calculation they're obviously very security conscious they can't
Let's go run that Python code YOLO on whatever host.
So they're actually using external sandboxing services often.
And one, they're paying the second of overhead for that,
where they do need a new container.
But also they're paying the organizational complexity
of another provider.
They're paying the fee of running that.
Whereas Monty would allow you to do that kind of thing
right there in the process.
That is something that's really interesting
about how these LLMs are bad at math.
just add up these numbers and it might not get it right.
And so, like you said, they started, okay,
I'm gonna write some bit of code
that I know how to write really well and can verify.
And then I'll just apply this dataset to it, right?
Like you'll see it doing CSV types things with Python
and all sorts of stuff.
And so that's a really good place
where that Monty could be the foundation of it, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
And the other nice thing about that is
if you have the Python code and something does go wrong,
you're not having to like kind of guess
at what's going on inside the black box of the LLM.
Well, I suppose you are at some level,
but you have the code,
which is kind of the intermediate step
where you can go and verify,
yep, that code makes sense.
I mean, not saying everyone will do that,
but as a developer debugging it,
or as a data scientist trying to work out
whether or not it is likely to have got the right result,
I have the kind of intermediate representation
of the logic that I can go and review.
And so it's that much easier to debug.
- Yeah, for sure.
So let's talk about some of the columns.
Partial language completeness.
I'm not saying it needs to be completely complete, but what does it need?
For example, do you need really dynamic metaclass programming for your tool use?
Probably not, right?
Right, probably not.
What does it need?
Yeah, so the things we miss right now, I'll start with the downside.
side. The things we miss right now are classes, context managers, so with expressions, and match
expressions, which are obviously relatively new. I think classes are by far the most complex of those.
We will support them at some point. They're somewhat complex to get right. I have been
amazed by how much LLMs just don't need classes to do most of the stuff they're doing. So you can
pass a data class into Monty, and you will have some object where you can access attributes and
as of later today methods on that data class.
But what you can't do is define a class or a data class
in the Monty code itself.
I'm amazed at how often that's just not necessary.
Context managers will mostly be nice
because we can allow the LLM to write
the kind of code it might want to.
So let's say we allow the open,
at the moment the open built-in
is not provided at all for opening a file.
We have basic support for pathlib
via our way of allowing you
like very controlled access
to the outside world.
But if we have at open,
very often LLMs want to write
with open, yada, yada.
And we want to be able to support that.
Match expressions are neat
and I think will be more
and more common in Python.
I think we can, you know,
full support will be hard,
but getting most of it there is hard.
What we will never,
and then the other big part of partial
is we don't have the full standard library.
So we have a very,
very limited standard library today.
of some bits of typing, some bits of the sys module,
os.envaron, there's a PR up from someone to add re,
regexes, date time, and I think we'll add JSON.
And so those will all be supported.
And to be clear, they will all be implemented in Rust.
So like JSON.loads will be Rust-level performance
of loading that thing.
I mean, we've been of overhead to creating the Monty object,
but very, very fast.
Right, right.
But we're never going to go and support the whole standard library.
It'll be on a case-by-case that LLMs actually need this thing
that we can go and add them.
I will say, and I know we're going to talk about this at some point,
but it is amazing what this project is only made possible by LLMs.
And not that we're ever aiming the full standard library,
but adding support for certain modules in the standard library
is a heck of a lot easier when you can, again,
We have a perfect record of what it's supposed to do.
So we can go and ask the LLM to build that.
You've got the test for like CPython has a ton of tests.
You can extract out the bits that apply to that maybe and just say, well, does it run here?
I'll come on to like three reasons why I think this is possible with LLM.
Let me just, the last point that's going to make is what we will never support is, or I think never support is third party libraries.
So you'll never be able to pip install Pydantic or FastAPI or requests inside Monty.
And because the reason for that is we would need to support the CPython ABI and basically support full CPython.
And if you're going to do that, you're basically back to CPython.
And so, sure, there are ways of sandboxing CPython, most of which are demonstrated here.
That's not the aim of this project.
However, what we can allow you to do is basically have a shim where you expose, let's say,
HTTPX get and post methods and patch and whatever you need through to Monty.
And we're currently working out whether or not we basically add those, provide those shims as part of the library.
So you don't need to go and think about that.
You can be like, yes, give it HTTP access or yes, give it access to DuckDB's SQL engine.
or give it access to beautiful soup and that shim comes and you don't need to go and implement it
so you can whitelist in like super critical libraries that people are like we if i had this
i could really yes so one of the questions we have now that we need to probably go run evals on to
find out is if we come up with a very pythonic type safe uh example of let's say an http library
and we give those types to the LLM, does it do better or worse with that than just being told
you can use requests? And I don't know the answer. There are genuine arguments in both cases.
Some people seem to be very sure one or the other is right. I just don't know. And that's the kind
of thing where we need to go and run evals and work out what an LLM will find easiest.
But yeah, we can either kind of attempt to fake the existing libraries API,
warts and all or we can go and in many cases just say oh we've got this new fetch library that has
a fetch method and here's its uh signature and i suspect the llm will do do a pretty good job of it
so what are the weird new it's not quite typo squatting but kind of typo squatting supply chain
type of issues has at least in the earlier days of llms they when you would ask it to write code
sometimes it would say we're going to import some library and that library didn't exist and then it
imagined a bunch of code series that happened after it so people would go and find popular ones
of those and then register malicious packages that the llms had hallucinated right um but i i guess
you probably kind of you kind of got to do a similar analysis but not for evil where you say
say, well, if I just ask Claude or Codex or whatever to do a thing, what does it try to do?
If you see it always asking for a question, maybe it's just better that we lie to it and say,
okay, whenever it says import request, we give it our special way to just get stuff off the internet.
And it only really needs to get put in like a couple of, it doesn't need all of requests. It
just needs a very basic behaviors. Is that the kind of stuff you're thinking?
Yeah, exactly that. And that's one of the reasons we didn't start with Starlark.
which is a uh i think originally a meta facebook project to have a like basically isolated python
runtime was because starlark has a very disciplined and principled approach to what it supports and
what it doesn't we have to be not principled we have to be like well if the llm wants to write
this thing we're gonna go and implement the csv module but not the tunnel live module because
that's just what they need to go and use and we're going to be like our principle is give the llm what
wants not here's our rule um uh so yeah yes exactly and yeah i mean i think boris boris the um
called code creator talked about this i saw him speaking he was saying like you know one of the
reasons they gave the llm bash early on was like you can tell it to use the makedar um tool to
make directories but half the time it'll just go and call makedar --p and make the directory
that way and like are we going to fight it and always return an error being like you should do
this other thing or we're just going to make that thing work and often you have to just make that
thing work yeah exactly so is this go ahead yeah is this useful outside of this for ai story you
know like if i'm creating something that has really high security i want to add some some
mechanism for people to write scripting, but not full on programming language. Do you see it used
in other places? Yeah, we've actually thought about this internally inside Logfire already. Like we
want to be able to give people a way of basically entering config, config that can do things. There's
no easy way of doing that right now, right? I said, sure, I can go and use as again, one of these
sandboxing services to run that code, all the complexity of setting it up, we offer self hosted
Logfire, so they're not going to work, etc, etc. Or once Monty is a bit more mature, we can just go
go and use Monty to let them define the expression.
It might be as simple as like,
what field do we use from
your profile to display as your name?
We can let you, or an AI can write
that one line of code that does that and then we can
call it lots of times that it's feasible now to have
the few lines of Python code to define this,
that's generally been hard until now.
But of course, the best tools are the ones where people
use the tool for not what it was originally designed for.
So someone invents the hammer and I think it's going to be used for nails.
And then someone else realizes that you can like change the,
like knockout like mistakes in your bumper of your car with a hammer.
Right. And like, what's amazing about Pydantic,
why I'm so proud of it is people gone and used it as a general purpose tool for
a bunch of things I'd never thought of.
So my like dream for Monty is that people come along with things to do with it
that I had never heard of. And like RLM is a really good example of that.
So recursive language models of this way in which you use almost always a
Python REPL as a way of implementing effectively agentic loop.
And there were some people who have an example of doing that and like getting
better results in the RKGI two benchmarks by using RLM.
I didn't even know about RLM is when I announced Monty,
there are now at least four different libraries that are using Monty for RLM
with,
with DSPY because the SPY,
because people are super excited about that space.
So that's,
that's agentic,
but it's definitely something I haven't thought of when I announced it.
Yeah, I was even thinking just like, I have a medical device, like a CT scanner.
I don't want to let people script it, but we can't break it and like zap somebody.
You know what I mean?
It needs to be really very, very controlled.
This could be a really interesting thing.
So does it compile to WebAssembly?
Can I in-browser it?
Yep.
And in fact, Simon Willison, the day it came out, or Simon Willison,
Claude prompted by Simon Willison set one up.
So I think if you go to Simon's blog somewhere, there's actually an example of Monty running somewhere in a browser that you can go and try.
It's probably an earlier version.
There you go.
Yeah, somewhere here.
I think he'll have a link to his version of it.
Okay.
So as he pointed out, you can do the really crazy thing, which is you can compile the Python package for, yes, this is his example, which is, I think, like WebAssembly running directly in the browser.
But he did something even more crazy, which is he took the Python library, compiled that to Wasm, and then called that from inside Pyodide, which is like crazy worlds within worlds.
Definitely not the original plan, but interesting.
Yeah.
Wow.
Okay.
So yes.
And here's your example to do it, right?
Yeah.
And I think the other thing we really need to add to this table in terms of latency and complexity is calling back to the host.
So one of the reasons a number of people have reached out to me and excited about this is, sure, they're happy to have a sandboxing service.
They don't even mind the second of start time.
But if they want to, for example, build an agent that can go and basically run SQL against a bunch of CSV files, how do I get those CSV files into the sandbox?
Well, that is painful and often slow because we have to make a full network round trip back to the host to get those files.
The network latent, sorry, the overhead of calling that function on the host in Monty is single digit milliseconds or maybe even less.
And so if you're making, if you're reading 50 different files from the local, from within
the sandbox, but effectively they're registered locally, that's super easy and performance.
Yeah.
Because it's running right there in the same process.
Very neat.
So a couple of questions.
Kunita says, we have agents running on AWS strands.
Here's the crazy thing about AWS.
There's like so many services.
I don't even know what strands is.
I think Strands is their agent framework.
Got it.
Yeah, yeah.
Will the use of Monty help us improve performance there?
Could they use Monty there?
Yes, it should be able to.
Again, apologies if I don't know exactly what Strands is.
If Strands is their agent framework, yes, in principle,
Pynantic AI, our agent framework, will have support for Monty
as a code execution environment later this week.
And so you'll be able to basically instead of running, yes, that open source agents SDK.
So I don't know whether AWS intend to add specific support for Monty, but I know our agent framework will support it later this week.
My guess from what we've built in the past is others will pick up on it and also integrate it into their things.
And of course, the nice thing is here, because the only real requirement is Rust, we already have the Python package and JavaScript package.
But if you wanted to call it from any other language, basically, where you can call Rust, that should be possible.
Nice. Very nice.
And data science?
You mentioned DuckDB already, sort of.
Yeah, NumPy would be great to have, I think, full...
I mean, I think this is where we need to be a bit careful about what we add.
Like, sure, if there are particular bits of NumPy that are useful, can we go and add shims for that?
Or can we even go and implement that in Rust?
So you can do a like NumPy matrix transformation that happens effectively in Rust, but we need to work out what people want.
And what we can't do, unfortunately, I'd love to be able to, but we can't do is just be like, yep, click this button.
And now we have the full NumPy API available.
That is the, you know, that's the big, I'm not going to say Achilles heel because I'm super optimistic about Monty, but that's the biggest challenge is that we don't just get to use all the libraries.
Let me propose a slightly different path.
Yep.
Polars.
Plus narwhals.
What's narwhals?
Narwhals is a facade across NumPy, polars, and a few other things that gives you,
like you can program an either and it'll talk to one or the other.
So basically you could use narwhals to talk NumPy, but it translates all the calls over to Polars.
Yeah.
I mean, given that, you know, there's a paradigm shift happening here.
What we're not trying to do is let your existing Python code run in this runtime.
We're trying to give it a context for LLMs to be able to write code.
And so why not?
I mean, Polars is written in Rust.
Exactly.
That's why I said that.
Yeah, yeah.
go and compile Polars into Monty.
And now you have a full, very performant data frame library
or analytical database effectively built into it.
And we have the full Polars API available in Monty.
That would be one option.
Again, I'm going to be a bit restrictive
and any color as long as it's black about what we add
because I don't think we don't need,
I don't care about your taste of whether you prefer polars to pandas or anything else.
I care about what do the LLMs find easy to do.
I think the biggest point of proof of that, Samuel, is that it doesn't do Pydantic yet.
If it doesn't do Pydantic, like, okay, you're walking the walk.
Yeah.
And to be clear, I don't think, yeah, am I going to vibe code a whole new Pydantic in Monty?
I don't know whether I'm keen for that yet.
Yeah.
Yes, indeed.
So how do I go about making my AI,
like let's say I'm doing clod code, opus 4.6, some project.
I'm actually, I'm not a huge fan of the terminal clod code.
I feel like it takes me too far away from the code.
just, I prefer to kind of have it in, to kind of editor, like the extension for say cursor or
VS Code where I can sort of like watch the code as it's going and sort of, no, no, no, you're going
the wrong way. Anyway, it doesn't matter really which, how you run it. Suppose I'm running it
somehow. How do I tell it about Monty? How does it know what Monty can and can't do? How do I make
it use Monty? You know what I mean? You wait a few weeks for us to have skills for Monty and the
rest of our stack and then you install those skills it's something we need to do and i think
that's the number we will have proper documentation for monty as well and that will that will be an
important part of it that's you know there's a lot to do here um lms can help with some of it but not
not by any means do all of it um i mean at the moment read the read me and read the issues and
i'm i am like impressed surprised scared by how much people are using monty already um wait
already what are you doing you know what i saw i i saw your announcement of this on x actually is
where i saw it and i believe it um it's been a while since i saw but it said something to the
effect of like this is way too early but what the heck here we go posted the github link right
something to that effect and that was what's that last week here we are with 5 000 stars yeah um
Yeah, exactly. And it shows how many people are looking, are interested in this space. I mean, look, a lot of people would have started thinking, oh, there's going to be a new Python that's just faster because it's in Rust and it's going to do everything better in a way that like you might argue, you know, Ruff is like wholly better than what one before.
That is not the aim for Monty.
This is not going to supplant or replace in any way CPython.
It's a completely separate thing.
But I think there's also a lot of people who have started this
because they're having a headache running stuff with existing options
for sandboxing, and something like this is interesting.
There's also another project that's worth calling out from Vassell
called Just Bash, which is very similar conceptually.
It's a bash environment written entirely in TypeScript by a team.
But I met them when I was in San Francisco a few weeks ago.
And the plan when I get around to finishing the JavaScript API is that they will in fact use Monty as the way of calling Python code.
Because they have some way of calling Python code within this, which I think uses Pyodide at the moment.
And it has some overheads and some challenges around security.
But yeah, this is very similar in the sense of like,
it's basically Vibe coding all of the terminal methods
that you might want and using a bunch of existing unit tests
to check that they're correct.
Interesting that obviously Visele is a much, much bigger name
than we are, and it hasn't got as much traction early on
as at least in terms of GitHub stars,
the worst of all vanity metrics.
They've been out like two or three times as long as you have,
and they've 1,000 stars.
that is i mean that's not worthy honestly yeah and there's another project like this which has about
20 stars which i was looking at earlier today which is this but in rust completely which already has
support for monty which i can't remember the name of right now but maybe i should find it quickly and
call it out because i feel like it deserves it given that it's a really cool project it has
uh as i say about uh 30 stars uh let me very quickly excuse me for one minute it was one of
One of the replies to my initial announcement.
Sorry, I will not be very long.
It's called BashKit.
BashKit?
I put the link here.
This already actually has optional support for using Monty as the Python runtime.
There we go.
Well, if I was logged into GitHub on my streaming machine, I would have one more star, but I'll do it later.
Fair enough. Fair enough.
But I think what's interesting is all of these three projects, and I've heard of a few others,
these are only possible, really, or they're only really challenges anyone would take on with the advantage of an AI.
And so I was mentioning this earlier.
I think there are three reasons why these things have...
I'll talk about Monty in particular, why it is possible now when it wasn't before,
and why it is something where the speed up from an LLM
is even greater than in most coding tasks.
One, the LLM knows in its soul, in its weights,
the internal implementation,
how to go about implementing a bytecode interpreter
or how to implement it.
If I ask most even experienced Python engineers
or Rust engineers, how do I write a bytecode interpreter?
They would scratch their head and be like,
yeah, I sort of know about this.
I'll put my hand up and say,
I didn't know what a bytecode interpreter was
or how they worked until I and Claude built one together.
But like they know exactly how to do it
'cause they've read 15 different,
well-trodden implementations.
- And it's got a great example.
You can say not just any,
here's the Python, CPython one,
just help me do that, whatever that does.
- And the second thing is they know
what the public interface is again in their soul,
as in they know what Python should be like.
They know the signature of the filter function
without you having to go and describe it.
Thirdly, you have an amazing set of unit tests,
which is basically just does it match CPython.
So in our case, we basically vibe generate tests
whenever we're adding a feature
and then we run them with CPython and Monty
and we confirm that they are identical output
down to the byte.
The exceptions have to be identical to the byte.
But in the case of JustBash,
they have the existing set of like
tests somewhere for like any shell environment that they're able to leverage. And I think one
thing we might do at some point is basically go steal a bunch of CPython tests and run them with
both. I haven't got there yet, but that would be an interesting way ahead. And then the last thing is
you don't have to bike shed or have any human debate about what should the function, what should
the error message be when you try and add an int to a string. There's no debate about that. You're
just doing whatever CPython does. And so there's a whole range of bike shedding debates that we just
don't have to go and have because we're just like trying to target CPython. Now, of course,
around the edge of that, there's a bunch of places where we do have to think about it. Like, how do
we do these external function calling things? And that's, that is obviously, that is honestly much,
much slower because we don't have this, like the LLM knows already the answer approach. But I think
these are the kinds of tasks where LLMs are massively faster or one, one set of cases where
LLMs are massively faster than without. So I was speaking to a big public company in New York who
was saying that one of their team had Vibe-coded a Redis clone in Rust, put it into production after
72 hours, and it was 30% faster than Redis. It probably worked fine, right? Yeah. And why is
that possible? Well, the same things are all true. The unit test is super easy. It's just,
is it the same as Redis? There's no debate about what the API is, et cetera, et cetera. And so
there are these tasks which historically we would have thought were super hard so i think often we
fall into the trap of thinking that what llms are good at is what humans are good at and what llms
are bad at is what humans are bad at i think more and more we're seeing there are things that llms are
much better at than we are and there are things that they are that they're less good at and we're
still very early in learning what those things are but it is not good enough just to be just to use
the like naive simplistic approach of like what humans are good at they're good at yeah
The simplest example of that is like,
ask an LLM to generate you a B-tree implementation in C.
And that prompt alone, it will write you 500 lines of C
that work as a B-tree implementation.
- It takes you 20 minutes to study it, to be sure.
And it's like, you're not,
oh, I think it works this way, right?
- Yeah.
- I honestly think the little bits of weird math
and the little hallucinations and stuff
have shaken a lot of people's trust in these things.
And it's just like, well, I mean, how easy is this to add five numbers?
Come on.
Obviously, these things are junk because they can't do that.
And it's just like, well, maybe that's not the tool to use for that situation.
Right.
Yeah.
But what you're using here is incredible.
But again, we have the guardrails of you must write unit tests all the time that match the
two.
I mean, well, or we have fuzzing going on.
The fuzzing is another amazing technique.
So we have a JSON parser called Jitter, which is about the fastest JSON parser in Rust that
We also, it's built into Pydantic Core,
but it's also actually independently a package in PyPI
that's used an awful lot.
You'll see it in the dependencies of OpenAI, for example.
But Jitter was where I discovered about fuzzing, really.
No, I found out about it through the Hypothesis project
of my friend Zach Hatfield-Dodds in Python,
but then fuzzing in Rust,
because the performance is so much better,
is really powerful.
So basically it's generating random strings and using them as an input to something,
but then it's using very clever stochastic techniques to work out where to try more things.
And so you can basically fuzz Monty.
You can just give it arbitrary strings for hour after hour,
and periodically it'll find something where there's an error,
where the memory usage is too high if you do the following sequence of multiplying integers together.
I don't think it will find a true read-the-file system vulnerability,
but it'll definitely find odd memory uses
or it has found stack overflows and panics
and things like that.
- Yeah, very interesting.
Well, I think people are excited about it.
It's definitely got a lot of people talking,
a lot of attention, a lot of comments in the live stream.
So congrats and keep us posted on where it goes.
- Will do. Thank you very much.
Yeah, thanks so much for having me.
- You bet. Bye.
- Cheers.